Eclipse - or not
================

In the very first versions of ERT it was all about running Eclipse - there was no
general forward model. The concept of general forward model came quite quickly
and since then the special treatment of Eclipse has gradually been reduced. It
is now possible to run a forward model without Eclipse at all, but ERT is still
quite far from a situation where Eclipse is just any other forward model. For
good and for bad there is quite a lot of functionality in ERT which is
specifically targeted at Eclipse.

Eclipse keywords
----------------

``DATA_FILE``
  This is the name of ECLIPSE data file used to control the simulations. The
  datafile used with this keyword should be prepared for use with ERT, and will
  generally not be a 100% valid ECLIPSE data file:

	::

		-- Load the data file called ECLIPSE.DATA
		DATA_FILE ECLIPSE.DATA

  The preparations you should do to this file include:

  1. You should insert ``INCLUDE`` statements to include the various uncertainty
     parameters in use at the right place in the datafile.

  2. You must make sure that the include files used in the datafiles can be
     correctly resolved from the runpath location.

  3. See the ``DATA_KW`` keyword which can be used to utilize more template
     functionality in the eclipse datafile.

  When actually running the simulations the file given with the ``DATA_FILE``
  keyword will be used as a template, and a realization specific datafile will
  be written to the runpath folder, the name of this file is given by the
  :ref:`ECLBASE <target_ECLBASE>` keyword.  

.. _target_ECLBASE
``ECLBASE``
  This is the name of the eclipse simulations which will be generated by ERT,
  the ``ECLBASE`` argument should typically contain a ``%d`` format specifier,
  which will be replaced with the realisation number when ERT creates the
  runpath directories:

::

   ECLBASE eclipse/CASE_%d

  Observe that it is possible to add a leading directory part to the ``ECLBASE``
  setting as illustrated above; the directory ``eclipse/`` will be generated as
  a subfolder in the runpath directories.


``GRID``
  This should be the name of an existing GRID/EGRID file. The main use of the
  grid is to map out active and inactive cells when using ``FIELD`` data. If you
  do not use ``FIELD`` data you do not need the ``GRID`` keyword. The grid
  argument will only be used by the main ERT application and not passed down to
  the forward model in any way. 




``SCHEDULE_FILE``
  DEPRECATED!

Running with a different reservoir simulator
--------------------------------------------

Running without a reservoir simulator
-------------------------------------


